ALİ ÇETİN 
 3023/51                      

            HITLER'S PROBABLE BEHAVIOR IN THE FUTURE 
                



        As the tide (eğilim,cereyan)of battle turns against Hitler it may be well to consider very briefly the possibilities of his future behavior and the effect that each would have on the German people as well as on ourselves.

1. Hitler may die of natural causes.

       This is only a remote possibility since, as far as we know, he is in fairly good health except for his stomach ailment(ciddi olmayan hastalık) which is, in all probability, a psychosomatic disturbance. The effect such an event would have on the German people would depend on the some other ridiculous disease, it would be a material help in breaking the myth of his supernatural origins.
 
2. Hitler might seek refuge (sığınak)  in a neutral country.
 
       This is extremely unlikely in view of his great concern about his immortality. Nothing would break the myth more effectively than to have the leader run away at the critical moment. Hitler knows this and has frequently condemned the Kaiser for his flight 
to Holland at the close of the last war. Hitler might want to escape as he has escaped from other unpleasant situations, but it seems almost certain that he would restrain (alıkoymak)   himself.

3. Hitler might get killed in battle.

       This is a real possibility. When he is convinced that he cannot win, he may lead his troops into battle and expose himself as fearless and fanatical leader. This would be most undesirable from  our  point of view because his death would serve as an example to his followers to fight on with fanatical, death-defying(ölüme meydan okuyan) determination to the bitter end. This would be what Hitler would want for he has predicted that:
"We shall not capitulate(teslim olmak)...no, never. We my be destroyed, but if we are, we shall drag a world with us...a world in flames." . 
"But even if we could not conquer them,we should drag half the world into
destruction with us and leave no one to triumph over Germany. There will not
be another 1918.	"
At a certain point he could do more towards the achievement of this goal by dying heroicily than he could by living. Furthermore, death of this kind would do more to bind the German people to the Hitler legend and insure his immortality 
than any other course he could pursue(kovalamak).

4. Hitler might be assassinated.

      Although Hitler is extremely well protected there is a possibility that someone may assassinate him. Hitler is afraid of this possibility and has expressed the opinion that:
"His own friends would one day stab him mortally in the back... 
       And it would be just before the last and greatest victory, at the moment of supreme tension. Once more Hagen would slay(öldürmek) Siegfried. Once more Hermann the Liberator would be murdered by his own kinsmen.(erkek akraba) The eternal destiny of the German nation must be fulfilled yet again, for the last time."
This possibility too, would be undesirable from our point of view in as much as it would make a martyr(şehit) of him and strengthen the legend.
It would be even more undesirable if the assassin were a Jew for this would convince  the German people of Hitler's infallibility (şaşmazlık )and strengthen the fanaticism of the German troops and people. Needless to say, it would be followed by the complete extermination(yoketme ,imha) or all Jews in Germany and the occupied countries.

5. Hitler may go insane(deli). 

      Hitler has many characteristics which border on the schizophrenic. It is possible that when faced with defeat his psychological structure may collapse and leave him at the mercy of his unconscious forces. The possibilities of such an outcome diminish(azaltmak)  as he becomes older, but they should not be entirely excluded. This would not be an undesirable eventuality from our point of view since it would do much to undermine 
he Hitler legend in the minds of the German people.
      In any case, his mental condition will continue to deteriorate(kötüleşmek). He will fight as long as he can with any weapon or technique that can be  conjured up (hatıra getirmek )   to meet the emergency. The course he will follow will almost certainly be the one which seems to him to be the surest road to immortality and at the same time drag the world down in flames.


   


Shofar FTP Archive File: people/h/hitler.adolf/oss-papers/text/oss-profile-06

